Index.htm

Philosophy is hard to define. It borders a lot of other areas of study, like Psychology, religious study, and even Literature. However the general consensus is that philosophy is at the root of human knowledge. It is the study of the nature of knowledge in it self. Philosophy answers questions like “what can be known to be real?” and “can we be known to exist?” Philosophy also branches into ethics, the study of right, and wrong. Rather than calculating what can be done, like science, philosophy asks, “Should it be done?” 

Source(s)
Webster’s Dictionary

FreeWill.htm

Free will is the human ability to make a self-determined decision. Freedom seems like such a basic principle that it’s ridiculous to say we are not free, right?
American philosopher, and psychologist William James, chose to believe that his will was free, however he has published a lot of work for the doctrine of Determinism. Determinism says that all events are a direct cause of a passed event. To James, Determinism rejects the existence of chance, or human agency (free will). To put it another way, determinism implies that humans are machines that are governed by the mechanical laws of nature, and free will is simply an illusion. This argument however is very materialistic. What does the human experience say about free will?
Existentialist jean-paul Sartre argues that not only are we free but we are condemned to be free. That man is born nothing, and is forced to create himself through his actions.  Sartre refers to this idea as radical freedom, and determinism is merely a self-deceptive excuse to act as though we are not free. Sartre’s argument for freedom was born from phenomenology, the study of the human experience.  In his essay Existentialism is a Humanism Sartre famously said “Existence precedes essence” what Sartre means by this is that for objects like a computer, it’s essence (being the sum of all it’s formulae, or it’s blueprint) comes before it’s existence, while a Human first exist, then creates her essence through actions. To put it simply we decide who we are, and nothing else can determine who we want to be.  

Source(s)
Information Philosopher

Happiness.htm

In philosophy there are two definitions of happiness. There is happiness as in a life that goes well for a person leading it, and there is the psychological state of happiness. This page will focus on the former definition, and weather or not it is truly attainable.

Ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle was the first philosopher to come up with a “Science of happiness”. Aristotle defines Happiness as “Eudaimonia” which roughly translates to “human flourishing”. According to Aristotle this state of living can be achieved with virtuous activity by means of reason. But what does Aristotle mean by this? The answer to happiness that Aristotle offers us is that wisdom can help us identify morality, and by doing the right thing we can be happy with ourselves, and thus live a fulfilled life.

Aristippus of Cyrene, however, argues that only momentary pleasure exists, and that there is no such thing as fulfilled life of happiness. Aristippus makes this argument with his skeptical theory of knowledge. To Aristippus, the past and the future cannot be certain to exist, therefore a pleasure you feel in the moment is more valuable than a happiness that you anticipate. This however does not make Aristippus, and the like-minded slaves to their passions, rather he argues that with knowledge man can control their nature. This idea is best illustrated in his popular quote ¨Wise people, even though all laws were abolished, would still lead the same life¨.

Source(s)
pursuit-of-happiness.org

suicide.htm

It's often been implied that suicide is only a psychological problem. A chemical imbalance is a term that is often tossed around, but here´s where the borders between psychology, and philosophy become wuzzy.  From a philosophical standpoint we study the ethics, and reasoning behind suicide as an action.
Confucianism appears to be one of the largest schools of thought in the world. These are the teachings of the ancient Chinese philosopher Confucius. In the Confucius system of ethics their are five moral virtues. Ren, Yi, Li, Zhi, and xin. On the topic of suicide we look at Ren. Ren denotes the good feeling one gets when acting selfless, putting the value of yourself under the value of others. In Confucianism suicide is not only permissible in the case of doing it for Ren, but it is praised. For example, assume by nature you are a serial killer, and you have no way of changing that. By committing suicide you would be doing a tremendous act of selflessness, and in Confucianism you would achieve Ren. However this does not answer the question of weather or not life is worth living.
French-Algerian writer Albert Camus understood the importance of the question illustrated in his famous quote "There is but one truly serious philosophical problem, and that suicide." To Camus our universe is absurd, by that he means that is meaningless, and the absurdity comes from the human tendency to create meaning. Camus studies the implications of this paradox. To him man has three options when he is confronted with the absurd, Create your own meaning through religion, Camus argues that by doing this you impoverish yourself from the true value of life because you see it in the scope of your eternal afterlife. The second is committing suicide, To Camus this will only negate the problem rather than solving it. Lastly Camus illustrates the solution to the problem in the form of a metaphor, The Myth Of Sisyphus. In this book sized essay Camus describes Sisyphus, the greek king of Ephyra, damned to push a rock up a hill only for it to fall back down again for the rest of eternity, Fully understanding his futility, and hopeless labor, Camus encourages us to imagine Sisyphus happy, revolting against the absurdity of his existence.

Source(s)
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy 

Meaning.html

The meaning of life is a questioned that has been pondered sense the earliest of human civilization. It is thought to be the ultimate goal of philosophy. There are hundreds of answers coming from many different religions, but rather that focusing on the content of those answers we will focus on the more fundamental point, is life even meaningful.
German philosopher Fredrick Nietzsche was thought to be the father of Existential Nihilism. Nihilism is the doctrine that suggest life has no intrinsic meaning. In his famous quote "God is dead" Nietzsche describes the advancement of modern science, and secularization of European government "killing" the idea of an Existing god. Thus without god we are abandoned from any structured system of ethics, and live lives stripped of inherent value, and lacking in purpose.    
Danish Existentialist Soren Kierkegaard believed meaning could be attained through faith by virtue of the absurd, This is an idea that is potent in the doctrine of Existentialism, and it suggest the existence of the irrational. In order to understand this we must first properly define rationality, to Kierkegaard, rationality is a medium of inquiry that makes life more efficient. Through it we are able to attain better technology like cars, computers, and television. However Kierkegaard believed an easy life, is not a meaningful life. When rationality is used to inquire things like the meaning of life it simply fails. To Kierkegaard meaning comes from within, truth is subjective. When it comes to making a meaningful choice, the truth can only be defined by the self, and not by the medium of reason.

Source(s)
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Resources.htm

Many of the ideas present on this site are over-simplifications that only scratch the surface of their complexity. If you wish to learn more we encourage you read these books.

Free Will
being and nothingness, Jean-paul Sartre
A will to believe, William James

Happiness
The works of Aristotle, Aristotle
The Cyrenaics, ugo zilioli

Suicide
The works of Confucius
The Myth of Sisyphus, Albert Camus

Meaning
The Genealogy of morals, Fredrick Neichze
Transforming vision, M. Jamie Ferreira
 


